Transactions in MySQL
Now, we will explore how MySQL handles transactions using the AUTOCOMMIT, COMMIT, and ROLLBACK statements. Understanding these is essential for maintaining data integrity in your databases, especially in data science workflows where large and complex data operations are common.

What is a Transaction?
A transaction is a sequence of one or more SQL statements that are executed as a single unit. A transaction has four key properties, known as ACID:

Atomicity: All or nothing.
Consistency: Valid state before and after.
Isolation: Transactions do not interfere.
Durability: Changes persist after commit.
AUTOCOMMIT
By default, MySQL runs in autocommit mode. This means that every SQL statement is treated as a separate transaction and is committed automatically right after it is executed.

Check Autocommit Status
SELECT @@autocommit;

Disable Autocommit
SET autocommit = 0;

This allows you to group multiple statements into a transaction manually.

Enable Autocommit
SET autocommit = 1;

COMMIT
The COMMIT statement is used to permanently save all the changes made in the current transaction.

Example
START TRANSACTION;
 
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 100 WHERE id = 1;
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance + 100 WHERE id = 2;
 
COMMIT;

Once committed, the changes are visible to other sessions and are stored permanently in the database.

ROLLBACK
The ROLLBACK statement is used to undo changes made in the current transaction. It is useful if something goes wrong or a condition is not met.

Example
START TRANSACTION;
 
UPDATE accounts SET balance = balance - 100 WHERE id = 1;
 
-- An error or condition check fails here
ROLLBACK;

After a rollback, all changes since the start of the transaction are discarded.

Summary Table
Statement	Description
AUTOCOMMIT	Automatically commits every query
SET autocommit = 0	Disables autocommit mode
COMMIT	Saves all changes in a transaction
ROLLBACK	Reverts all changes in a transaction
Best Practices
Always use transactions when performing multiple related operations.
Disable autocommit when working with critical data updates.
Rollback if any step in your transaction fails.
Test your transactions thoroughly before running them on production data.