Indexes in MySQL
An index in MySQL is a data structure that makes data retrieval faster—especially when you're using WHERE, JOIN, ORDER BY, or searching large tables.

Think of an index like the index in a book: instead of reading every page, MySQL uses the index to jump straight to the relevant row(s).

Why Use Indexes?
Speed up queries that search, filter, or sort data.
Improve performance for frequent lookups or joins.
Enhance scalability of your database over time.
How to Create an Index
1. Single Column Index
CREATE INDEX idx_email ON users(email);

You're telling MySQL:

"Create a quick lookup structure for the email column in the users table."

2. Multi-column (Composite) Index
CREATE INDEX idx_name_city ON users(name, city);

This is useful when your query filters on both name and city in that specific order.

How to Delete (Drop) an Index
DROP INDEX idx_email ON users;

You're saying:

"Remove the index named idx_email from the users table."

When to Use Indexes
Use indexes when:

A column is often used in WHERE, JOIN, or ORDER BY clauses.
You're searching by unique fields like email, username, or ID.
You're filtering large tables for specific values regularly.
You want to improve performance of lookups and joins.
When Not to Use Indexes
Avoid adding indexes when:

The table is small (MySQL can scan it quickly anyway).
The column is rarely used in searches or filtering.
You're indexing a column with very few unique values (like a gender field with just 'M' and 'F').
You’re inserting or updating very frequently—indexes can slow down writes because they also need to be updated.
Viewing Existing Indexes
To list all indexes on a table:

SHOW INDEX FROM users;

Summary
Action	Syntax Example
Create index	CREATE INDEX idx_name ON table(column);
Delete index	DROP INDEX idx_name ON table;
List indexes	SHOW INDEX FROM table;
Indexes are essential for performance, but overusing them or indexing the wrong columns can actually hurt performance. Use them wisely based on how your data is queried.