Subqueries in MySQL
A subquery is a query nested inside another SQL query.
It helps you perform complex filtering, calculations, or temporary data shaping by breaking down the logic into smaller steps.

You can use subqueries in SELECT, FROM, or WHERE clauses.

What is a Subquery?
A subquery is enclosed in parentheses and returns data to be used by the outer query.
It can return:

A single value (scalar)
A row
A full table
Subquery in the WHERE Clause
Example: Employees who earn more than average
SELECT name, salary
FROM employees
WHERE salary > (
    SELECT AVG(salary)
    FROM employees
);

We are telling MySQL: "First calculate the average salary, then return employees with salaries greater than that."

Subquery in the FROM Clause
Example: Department-wise average salary above 50,000
SELECT department, avg_salary
FROM (
    SELECT department, AVG(salary) AS avg_salary
    FROM employees
    GROUP BY department
) AS dept_avg
WHERE avg_salary > 50000;

We are telling MySQL: "Create a temporary table of average salaries by department, then filter departments where the average is above 50,000."

Subquery in the SELECT Clause
Example: Count of projects per employee
SELECT name,
       (SELECT COUNT(*) FROM projects WHERE projects.employee_id = employees.id) AS project_count
FROM employees;

This gives each employee along with the number of projects they are assigned to.

Correlated Subqueries
A correlated subquery depends on the outer query. It runs once for each row in the outer query.

Example: Employee earning more than department's average
SELECT name, department, salary
FROM employees e
WHERE salary > (
    SELECT AVG(salary)
    FROM employees
    WHERE department = e.department
);

We are telling MySQL: "For each employee, compare their salary with the average salary of their department."

Types of Subqueries
Type	Description
Scalar Subquery	Returns a single value
Row Subquery	Returns one row with multiple columns
Table Subquery	Returns multiple rows and columns
Correlated Subquery	Refers to the outer query inside the subquery
When to Use Subqueries
When your logic depends on calculated values (like averages or counts)
When you need to filter based on dynamic conditions
When you're breaking down complex queries for readability
When to Avoid Subqueries
When the same result can be achieved with a JOIN, which is often faster
When the subquery is being executed repeatedly for every row (correlated subqueries on large tables)
Summary
Clause	Use Case
WHERE	Filter based on the result of a subquery
FROM	Use a subquery as a derived table
SELECT	Add related calculations inline
Subqueries are powerful for solving multi-step problems and isolating logic, but be mindful of performance when working with large data sets.